Hi, my name is Chad Berkley.
I'm the CTO of FlightStats, and I'm here
today to talk to you a little bit about
our platform and
how we acquire and process data.
But first of all, I'd like to start by
just kind of introducing the company and
telling you a little bit
about what we're all about.
So FlightStats is a data company and
we basically are the leading provider
of global real-time flight status data.
We pull in data from over 500 sources and
we aggregate that data back together, and
we sell it out to our customers which our
other businesses as well as consumers.
So just to give you a little bit
of information about the scope and
scale of what we do.
Like I said,
we have over 500 sources of data.
And on a daily basis,
we process about 15 million flight events,
those that includes landings,
arrivals, departures.
Any time the status of the flight changes,
we got some sort of message on that.
We process about 260 million aircraft
positions per day, so we have an extensive
network that monitors graph positions for
realtime flight tracking applications.
And we also handle about One million PNRs,
or passenger name records,
which are the actual data type
of an itenerary any time you
book travel, a PNR is created for
you, for your travel.
And it includes all of the segments,
like air travel, ferries,
hotels, taxis, Anyhting that
can be scheduled on your trip.
And we basically take in all that data and
we aggregate it together and
we sell it back out.
And how most people kind of know us for
FlightStats.com, that's our
consumer site for business where we
handle about 2 million daily requests.
And we handle about 1
million mobile app requests.
That our b to b side, we cert out a lot
of data by APIs and real time data feeds.
People make about 15 million
API requests to us everyday.
And we also send out about one and half
million flight and trip notifications.
So if you get a push
notification to your phone,
telling you that your flight is delayed or
on time.
That possibly has come from us.
So a little bit about how the data
flows through our company.
We bring in all these
different types of data and
our sources and it flows through
our data acquisition team.
We have a team whose primary purpose
is to pull in all sorts of raw data,
a very heterogeneous datasets.
And process that into a normalized form.
So if you kind of follow the blue arrow
in this diagram you can see that it goes
through this raw data
channel through the data hub.
Which the data hub is a central
component of our system that I'll talk
a little bit more about in a second.
So the blue data, the blue line is
raw data coming in from the source
It goes through our data
acquisition system,
it turns into that purple line
which is a normalized form.
It then goes back through our data hub
again and into our processing engine.
Our processing engine is really where
most of the business logic happens.
The first thing we have to do
is we have to match any piece of
flight information against
a flight that we know about and
primarily the way we know about
flights is through schedules.
So we import schedules on a daily
basis from one of our partner
schedule providers.
That data,
once it's matched is then processed and
the processing basically looks at each
message, and tries to determine if
we think that that message needs
to be passed on to consumers.
So you know it looks at things like,
have we seen that message before.
Or is it a duplicate?
Is it from a data source that we trust?
Are there other things going on
that we need to know about that
may impact whether that message is true or
not?
And once we decide that a message
should be passed through,
if you follow the green line.
It goes into our process
data channel on our hub, and
it's then pushed out to
a couple different places.
So first of all,
it goes into our production database which
is where all of our real time data lives.
That database serves data to our websites,
to our mobile apps, and
a variety of other places.
It also goes into our
data warehouse which,
is where our analytics products use it.
I'll talk a bit more
about that in a minute.
And then, the stream of data actually
goes up to so many of our customers.
We don't need a database on our side.
They would rather build
a database on their side so
we actually just stream all of
the processed data directly to them.
They then host it within
their own systems.
So a little bit more about the hub, the
hub is central to how we move data around.
It's a technology that
we developed in-house.
And it's an object storage based,
scalable, highly available,
multi-channel data queuing and
eventing system.
The object storage part is,
we use Amazon S3 to store this data.
So it's an object storage system.
It's scalable,
we can scale it horizontally or
vertically depending on, but the what
type of data is flowing through it.
It's highly available meaning,
that we have multiple instances
of it in different data centers.
So if one that goes down we can
easily pull another one up or
it's we're going to cross
multiple instances.
And then it's multi channel.
So it's got a rest interface and
any surface can create
a new channel within the system and
start posting data to it.
That data is then queued based on
the time that it comes in, and
other services can be listening for
events on those channels.
So, as soon as a new piece of data
comes into one of those channels,
any service that's listening on that
channel, gets an event notification.
They, that service can then
act upon that piece of data.
And do whatever processing
it may need to do.
This project is open source and
anybody can download it and use it.
So a little bit about some of the data
that we collect and aggregate.
And FLIFO is kind of the industry term for
flight information.
And primarily we look at kind of
the five different parts of flight.
So we pull in information on gate
departure, and then that becomes a runway
departure, basically when the wheels
go up, that is a runway departure.
We do in-flight positional tracking,
so when your flight is moving along,
about once every ten seconds we get
notified of its latitude and longitude.
And its heading and its speed and
its vertical center descent rate and
several other variables.
Then once it lands,
as soon as the wheels touch the ground,
we're notified of a runway arrival and
when the door is opened at the gate,
we have gate arrival information.
All five of these data fields
come in three different forms.
So we have a scheduled,
scheduled departure and arrival.
We have estimated departure and arrival
which can come from a variety of sources,
either airlines, airports,
positional data, et cetera.
And then, we have actuals so
if we have an airport or
an airline that's sending us data about
exactly when the wheels touch down, or
exactly when that door opens on that
aircraft, we push that data as well.
We also generate some
data at flight stops.
So special incidents, if an aircraft
has an issue It's in the news.
We do flag our content with
a message from our support staff.
We do some prediction.
Right now we're just starting to get into
that market, or we're actually trying to
predict 24 hours out whether a flight
will be delayed, disrupted or on time.
We do some synthetic positions,
so over oceans, primarily.
We don't get tracking data
on aircraft over the oceans.
There is currently no satellite-based
tracking system for aircraft.
So we basically take the last
known position a heading, a speed.
And if we have a flight plan, we'll use
a flight plan to synthesize the positions
when we're not getting actual
positions over large bodies of water.
We also generate notifications,
so the push alerts,
the preflight emails,
delay notifications those types of things.
We create those based on what we see
in the data that's coming in to us.
We store all of our historical
data in a data warehouse,
so right now we have six years
of historical flight data.
And that powers our analytics products,
so we allow airlines to do competitive
analysis, and route analysis.
Routes are very important to airlines.
That's how they compete
with each other and
that's primarily how they
are judged by the FAA and
other governmental organizations
on whether they're on-time or not.
We also do airport operations analysis
things like taxi in and taxi out times.
Very important for lots of airports,
runway utilization,
hourly passenger flows through airports,
that type of information.
And we do on-time performance metrics so.
Airlines can look at how they're doing.
How many flights did they complete?
How many flights were on
time within 14 minutes?
And they can compare themselves
to their competitors.
So we host all of this in
a hybrid cloud architecture.
Hybrid cloud basically means that we have
our own private datacenter resources and
we also host resources in
the Amazon Web Services cloud.
Most of our core data processing and
service layer is in our private data
center and we're getting ready to spin
up a second private data center as well.
Right now, our main data center is in
Portland, Oregon, and we're going to spin
another one up on the east coast of
the United States probably in Q2 or Q3.
For our API's we try to keep
those close to our customers so
API end points and
web end points live in Amazon.
And they are automatically routed to
whichever end point is closest to you,
you will automatically be routed to them.
All of our private infrastructure
is virtualized with VMWare.
We pretty much have a fully
virtualized environment.
And we're an Agile shop, so
we have six small, fast teams.
Those are product centric teams, we
allow them to be as customer interactive
as they need to be, and
we try to make our teams semi autonomous.
So, teams get to choose their own tools,
they get to choose their
own development methodologies,
they choose a variety of things.
And We physically allow them
to do what they need to do to get
their job done as quickly as possible.
We try to automate everything.
You do something once manually and
then the next time you write a script or
program to do it.
And we also measure everything.
Right now, we're taking in about
2.5 billion metrics per month off
of our systems.
And we use those metrics to monitor
our application performance,
to monitor revenue, to monitor pretty
much everything we do in the company.
We really try to enable
total system awareness,
everything from the hardware layer
up to the website is monitored.
And we use industry best practices and
tools and of course, we try to recruit and
hire the best talent possible a little
bit about our software stock.
We're primarily a Java shop.
Our core processing services
are all written in Java.
We do use node JS in our
Microservice Edge layer.
And node JS is actually starting to move
more down into the processing service
layer as well.
We use many different types of data bases.
Our primary realtime
database is Post Press.
And we use Mongo for
the backend of our API services.
On the website, we're all HTML5 and
we're moving to React and Redux, and
we're making use of Elasticsearch for
quick searching and indexing on our data.
And, of course, we have iOS and
Android mobile applications.
So you can find out more about
Flightstats on our website.
If you need data for your applications,
please go to the developer center
at developer.flightstats.com.
You can sign up for
a free test account and
be able to pull data
directly off of our APIs.
If you're interested in the Hub,
like I said that's open source.
Please check out the Git Hub page and
if you have any additional questions,
feel free to contact
myself John Berkeley and
I'd be happy to answer any
of your questions via email.
Thanks for listening today and
hope you have a great day.
Bye.